Rework schema publication + validation [BE-67] (#336)
apollographql/apollo: docs/source/platform/schema-registry.md

---
title: Track schema change history
description: Connect to the Apollo schema registry and track changes in your schema over time
---

The [GraphQL schema](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/tutorial/schema.html) is the center point of all GraphQL applications. It creates an enforceable contract between clients and servers, it is its own self-updating API documentation, and it provides powerful development workflows thanks to its type safety. As GraphQL scales in an organization and as GraphQL schemas grow, it becomes really important to have tools to help your team safely evolve your schema over time. At scale, you might have hundreds or thousands of clients in the world making queries that rely on fields, types, and arguments in your schema that are impossible to track without tooling.

> At Apollo, we're driven to help teams be successful with GraphQL both at the initial adoption phase and as they scale GraphQL across their organization. As such, the [Apollo Platform](/docs/intro/platform.html) provides a free schema registration service for teams of all sizes to use. Much like version control for your code, the Schema Registry allows you to evolve your API over time while keeping a record of when each change was made and helping you catch breaking changes before they're every deployed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [Apollo platform](/docs/intro/platform.html) includes a free schema registration service to help teams of all sizes easily evolve their API over time. Just like it's important to track source code in a version control system, it's a [best practice](https://principledgraphql.com/integrity#3-track-the-schema-in-a-registry) to track the definition of your graph in a schema registry. Once a team registers its schema with Apollo, developers have visibility into when a change was made, who made the change, and the type of change. The registry also supports tracking multiple versions of the graph (for example, staging vs. production).
```

> <h4 id="benefits">Benefits of registering your schema</h4>

Reviewer: I'm not sure I would call these benefits, since we've already talked about the benefits above. Maybe developer tooling or workflows? I would also move this section to the bottom, make it an h2 or h3, and go straight into setup.

> By keeping your schema up-to-date in Apollo's schema registry, you can get a number of workflow benefits through integrations with Apollo's other tools:

Author: an example of without -ing: 

An up-to-date schema in Apollo's schema registry enables a number of workflow benefits through integrations with other tools. A registered schema combined with: 

- The [Apollo VS Code extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=apollographql.vscode-apollo) provides built-in linting on queries by validating against the schema in your registry, and annotates fields on your queries with performance indicators collected in Apollo's trace warehouse.
- [Schema validation](./schema-validation.html) creates a diff between your local schema and the last schema uploaded to the registry, and validates this diff against live traffic seen on your endpoint to make sure you never accidentally deploy a breaking schema change to production.
- The [Schema History](#history) keeps track of all the changes made to your schema over time.

- The [Apollo VS Code extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=apollographql.vscode-apollo), which provides built-in linting on queries by validating against the schema in your registry, and annotates fields on your queries with performance indicators collected in Apollo's trace warehouse.

> - [Schema validation](./schema-validation.html), which creates a diff between your local schema and the last schema uploaded to the registry, and validates this diff against live traffic seen on your endpoint to make sure you never accidentally deploy a breaking schema change to production.

Reviewer: This feels a little misleading, since validating against live traffic is only something you can do if you're on a paid plan. Can we specify that you only validate against live traffic if you're on Team or Enterprise?

- `apollo service:push`: upload a new schema to the registry
- `apollo service:download`: download a schema from the registry
- `apollo service:check`: compare the local schema against running traffic and validate if proposed changes will break any live queries

Type `apollo service --help` for full details on the commands available in the CLI.

<h2 id="push">Uploading a schema</h2>

You publish a schema to the registry by running `apollo service:push` from within your respository. The CLI will know where to fetch your local schema from based on the configuration you gave in your `apollo.config.js` file. Each time a new veresion of your schema is published, it is logged in your schema history and it becomes the basis of comparison for `apollo service:check`.

Here's what running `apollo service:push` will look like:

```
~/Development/apollo/example$ apollo service:push
  ✔ Loading Apollo Project
  ✔ Uploading service to Engine

id      schema        tag
──────  ────────────  ───────
190330  example-4218  staging
```

> ### Hooking into CI

Reviewer: I think we need to mention that you need to hook into CI much earlier, not sure where.

<h2 id="benefits">Benefits of publishing a schema</h2>

The Apollo schema registry provides a number of benefits to help teams collaborate and ship high quality software faster. A few of these benefits are:

- Powering editor tools like the [Apollo VS Code extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=apollographql.vscode-apollo)
- Enabling better code reviews and safer changes with [schema validation](./schema-validation.html)
- Maintaining a single source of knowledge for all teams with the [Apollo schema explorer](https://engine.apollographql.com)
- Sharing upcoming changes with [schema tags](#schema-tags)
- Protecting the server when combined with the [Apollo operation registry](./operation-registry.html)
- Keeping the history of schema changes with the [Apollo schema history tab](#history)

<h2 id="setup">Publishing a schema</h2>

> Publishing schemas to the Apollo schema registry occurs when pushing a GraphQL service to Engine. A service contains information about the schema and how to run it. Part of this push includes registering the service's schema. To begin using the schema registry and perform a service push, use the [`apollo` command line interface (CLI)](https://npm.im/apollo).

Author: Woot added to the glossary. Good catch!

Once the `apollo` command is installed, the `apollo service:push` command is used to publish a schema to Apollo Engine.

To push a service, start the GraphQL server and run the following command, substituting the appropriate GraphQL endpoint URL and API key:

> > An API key can be obtained from a service's _Settings_ menu within the [Apollo UI](https://engine.apollographql.com/).

Reviewer 2: Are we ready to start talking about the "Apollo UI" publicly? Should we do a whole migration of the world...?

Author: We aren't!

<h3 id="viewing-schema">Viewing a published schema</h3>

Now that the service is pushed, view it on the [Apollo UI](https://engine.apollographql.com) by browsing to the service's dashboard. The pushed service should now appear with an overall schema summary about its types and fields, as well as full information about every type, argument, and description in the schema. With a published schema, teams can now use productivity boosters such as the [Apollo VS Code extension](./editor-plugins.html)

<h2 id="schema-tags">Coordinating with schema tags</h2>

> Product cycles move incredibly fast and coordination of teams is critical to shipping features quickly. To enable communication, the Apollo schema registry allows teams to push proposed or future versions of their schema to the registry. These new versions are used in editors, validation, and documentation as the source of truth for future schemas.

Reviewer 2: This section doesn't explain what a tag actually is, but instead gives an example of what it's useful for?

Reviewer 2: I think this section needs to be a bit more fleshed out (now that we're here; I recognize that this proposal is just a good copy change, but since this update ties so closely into our better understanding of schema tags, I think we should update this sections as part of it)

<h3 id="sending-tagged-metrics">Running a tagged schema</h3>

> To get the most out of tagged schemas, teams can send metrics to [Engine](https://engine.apollographql.com) with this tag. This enables a single service to be tracked in production, staging, and any other environment running a schema. To associate metrics with a schema, make sure the latest Apollo Server is installed and turn on tagging in one of two ways:

Reviewer 2: I don't understand when we want to say "Engine" vs. "The Apollo UI," and this sentence is a great example of why it's unclear. Let's take the renaming out of this PR until we understand when/why we would do that.

const server = new ApolloServer({
  // rest of normal server settings
  engine: {
    schemaTag: "beta"
  }
});
```

Both the new version of the schema, as well as its performance and error metrics can be viewed in the [Apollo UI](https://engine.apollographql.com) and used with [schema validation](./schema-validation.html).

<h2 id="history">Schema history</h2>

As the schema grows and evolves to meet the needs of the product, keeping and visualizing the history of schema changes becomes increasingly valuable. A consistent historical view allows everyone to understand when new features were introduced, when old fields were removed, and which commit made a change. The Apollo Platform provides the tooling necessary to track this history with the [`apollo service:push`](#publish) command.

> After a schema is published, it becomes the basis for comparison when validating future schemas to avoid breaking changes. Therefore, a service should be pushed to [Engine](https://engine.apollographql.com) each time a new schema is deployed.

Reviewer 2: published? push? I think it'd be better if we can stick to one word (now that we're here! Again, I know that these are just great copy changes you're making so far, but why not make them even better? 😉 )

Author: push a service and tag. Register a schema

To ensure the schema is published correctly and provides accurate analysis of breaking changes, add the `apollo service:push` command to the end of all deploy scripts. For example in a workflow with continuous deployment, configure the pipeline to run `apollo service:push` automatically on the `master` branch (or the appropriate mainline branch). An example CircleCI configuration details this below.

> > Note: in addition to pushing on deploy, publishing the schema on the `master` branch can provide a granular history of schema changes. This is often useful for teams without continuous delivery

Reviewer 2: Love it :)

      # commands against it
      - run: sleep 5

> 

Reviewer 2: Why are we removing this? Do we want a different note about the apollo.config.js?

Author: We talk about the setup above, so I was looking at simplifying the setup. I'll include it as a note at the bottom of the copy pastable configuration

Author: nvm we're removing this, since it doesn't have to do with schema registration and it's a part of schema-validation

      # commands against it
      - run: sleep 5

      # When running on the 'master' branch, push the latest version
      # of the schema to Apollo Engine.
      - run: |
          if [ "${CIRCLE_BRANCH}" == "master" ]; then
            apollo service:push --tag=master
          fi
```

<h2 id="history">Viewing schema change history</h2>

> Once you have uploaded your schema, you can view it through [Apollo's UI in Engine](https://engine.apollographql.com) by browsing to the History page in your Service. The published schema will appear in your history log along with a list of changes comparing it to the previously published versions of your schema. You can view the full contents of the most recently published version of your schema in the Explorer page.

Reviewer: Apollo UI in Engine sounds awkward, let's change to Apollo Engine.

<img src="../images/schema-history.png" width="100%" alt="Schema history page in the Engine UI">

> **Note:** in addition to pushing on deploy, registering the schema on the `master` branch can provide a granular history of schema changes. This is often useful for teams without continuous delivery

<h2 id="schema-tags">Managing environments</h2>

> Product cycles move fast, and it's common for a schemas to be slightly different across environments as changes make their way through your system. To accommodate for this, the schema registry allows each schema to be registered under a "schema tag". Tags are mostly commonly used to represent environments, but can also be used to represent things like branches and future schemas.

Author: The last sentence confuses me because I am confused by the overloaded term and don't understand the utility of a schema tag from this paragraph. I suggest we remove `but can also be used to represent things like branches and future schemas.`, since a tag as a branch will not be a part of the new schema validation snapshot
